---
title: "Vectors"
categories:
  - University
---

I highly reccomend you watch this video before working with Vectors
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fNk_zzaMoSs

# What is a vector?
A vector is a container where order matters and repitiions are allowed.
An N vector has n components, each component called <br>
$$U_1, U_2, ... , U_n$$ <br>
Different values in a vector can be the same, so: <br>
$$<1, 1>$$ <br>
is entirely possible with Vectors.

A 2-vector represents 2 dimensional space and a 3-vector represents 3-dimensional space.

# Doing maths with vectors

Two vectors can be added like so:

$$ \vec{A} + \vec{B} = \vec{W} = <A_1 + B_1, A_2 + B_2, ... , A_n + B_n>$$

The resultant is a new vector, $\vec{W}$.

Scalar multiplcation is where you increase every item in a vector by R.
Let R be a real number then:

$$ R * \vec{A} = \vec{W} = <A_1 * R, A_2 * R, ... , A_n * R>$$

Vector length can be defined using cardinality. The length of a vector, A, is |A|. 
The length of a vector has uses this formula:

$$ |\vec{a}| = \sqrt{({a_{1}  ^2} + {a_2  ^2} + ... + {a_n  ^2})} $$

If you try to calculate the length of a negative vector, you get the length of the positive vector.

$$ |\vec{-a}| = |\vec{a}| $$

# Vector Space

Start with some set of numbers such as real numbers, integers, whole numbers, rationals etc.

A set, V, of n-vectors is called a vector space if and only if:

1. $$\vec(u), \vec(x) \in V \Rightarrow \vec{u} + \vec{x} \in V $$
2. Given any number, R, from the original space (real numbers, integers, etc) and $$\vec{u} \in V$$ then $$\vec{u} * R \in V$$

The superscript number ontop of a set of numbers such as $\R^n$ is the set of all real valued (numbers that are in the real numbers) n-vectors where each component is in the set of Real numbers.

# Multiplying vectors
