---
title: "What is Tor?"
categories:
  - Papers
---

# What is Tor?

The Onion Routing Protocol (TOR) was designed by the US Navy in the mid 1990s at the U.S Naval Research Labatory[0].

The pre-alpha version of Tor was released to the public in September of 2002 [1] and the Tor project, the company that maintains Tor, was started in 2006.

Here is a quote from the paper titled "Tor: The Second-Generation Onion Router" on what Tor is in a nutshell:

> Tor is a circuit based low-latency anonymous communication service [2]

The core principle of Tor is "onion routing" which is a technique for anonymous communication over a public network. In onion routing messages are encapsulated in several layers of encryption, analogous to encapsulation in the OSI 7 layer model [3]. It is called onion routing because onions have layers and this networking protocol also has layers.

The resulting 'onion' (fully encapsulated message) is then transmitted through a series of nodes in a network (called onion routers) with each node peeling away a layer of the 'onion' and therefore uncovering the data's next destination. When the final layer is decrypted you get the plaintext of the original message.

The original author remains anonymous because each node in the network is only aware of the preceding and following nodes in the path (except the first node that does know who the sender is, but doesn't know the final destination).

This has led to 'attacks' on which the NSA runs servers in order to attempt to be the first and last nodes in the network. If the NSA server is the first node, it knows the message. If the NSA server is the last node, it knows the final destination. [4]

## Overview

> Onion Routing is a distributed overlay network designed to anonymise TCP-based applications like web browsing, secure shell and instant messaging.

Clients *choose* a path through the network and build a _circuit_ where each onion router in the paths knows the predecessor and the successor, but no other nodes in the circuit. 

Packets flows down the network in fixed-size cells (think packets) which are unwrapped by a symmetric key at each node and relayed downstream.

The notion of a symmetric key comes from Symmetric-Key Encryption Algorithms.

### Symmetric-Key Encryption Algorithms, a detour
In Symmetric Key Encryption the same key is used for both Alice (sender) and Bob (receiver) as opposed to public key encryption where these keys differ.
This makes it faster and easier to use than Public Key encryption, but this also causes two problems:
* The key needs to be stored securely
* Transfer of key may not be secured.

If a third party figures out the key, either by attacking the transfer of the key or some other method they will be able to decrypt all communications encrypted with this key.

Symmetric Key encryption is also much less computationally expensive than public key encryption, which is useful in a network like this.

*Public Key Cryptography* is a set of cryptographic protocols based on algorithms that require two separate keys:
* Public-key - Which is public and visible by others
* Private-key - Which is private and meant to be kept secret.

These two keys are mathematically linked. In public key cryptography the use of the public key is use encrypt plaintext and the use of the private key is to decrypt encrypted text. This means that anyone can encrypt plaintext for a specific person but only that person can decrypt it.

The two keys are very large prime numbers. Assume q and p are two separate and equally large prime numbers and then n = pq. n is used to encrypt the message and p and q are used to decrypt the message.

This works because factorisation is hard to compute. Given a very (very) large number, find the factors of that number which are prime numbers.

Often times the numbers are in hexadecimal.

### Digital Signatures

Another useful tool of cryptography to know is digital signatures.

Digital Signatures use public-key cryptography. A digital signature is a digital version of a physical signature. Often times you can say you have cryptographically / digitally signed a document. Only the person with the private key can produce valid digital signatures which allow them to sign a document alot more securely than a physical written signature.

Alice wants to digitally sign a message, m. In order to do that Alice must have:

* Private-key (signing key) - $$ Key_(private) $$
* Public-key (verification key) - $$ Key_(public) $$

Alice then uses a signing function to produce a digital signature:
$$ signing(message,KEY_(private))→signature $$

The _exact_ internals of the signing function isn't necessary to know. The function takes a message, a private key and it will produce a digital signature.

Anyone can use the public key to verify a digital signature:

$$ verify(m,signature,KEY_(public))→true or false $$


# References

[0] - http://www.onion-router.net/Publications/JSAC-1998.pdf
[1] - http://archives.seul.org/or/dev/Sep-2002/msg00019.html
[2] - http://fermatslibrary.com/s/tor-the-second-generation-onion-router
[3] - http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/1094702/
[4] - https://cyber-peace.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/Attacking-Tor_-how-the-NSA-targets-users-online-anonymity-_-World-news-_-theguardian.pdf