---
title: "How to write Pythonic Code"
categories:
  - Python
---
This is literally a test to see if my HTML is bad or if Github is slow


What is Pythonic Code?
Pythonic code is code that abuses the features of the Python language to write more efficient and better looking code whilest also maintaining the grammatical rules of Python.

If you type 
```import this```
Into Python, you get a summary of what pythonic code is.
>The Zen of Python, by Tim Peters
>
>Beautiful is better than ugly.
>Explicit is better than implicit.
>Simple is better than complex.
>Complex is better than complicated.
>Flat is better than nested.
>Sparse is better than dense.
>Readability counts.
>Special cases aren't special enough to break the rules.
>Although practicality beats purity.
>Errors should never pass silently.
>Unless explicitly silenced.
>In the face of ambiguity, refuse the temptation to guess.
>There should be one-- and preferably only one --obvious way to do it.
>Although that way may not be obvious at first unless you're Dutch.
>Now is better than never.
>Although never is often better than *right* now.
>If the implementation is hard to explain, it's a bad idea.
>If the implementation is easy to explain, it may be a good idea.
>Namespaces are one honking great idea -- let's do more of those!

But let's really dig deep into Pythonic code.

# Pep8
Pep8 is Python's style guide. It's how Python code should look like. Anyone writing Python code should read this, as it's essential to writing Pythonic code.
[this](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0008/)

# What is Pythonic code?
There are some 